## A Brief History of Risk Assessment

Societies have been dealing with risk for thousands of years. The earliest records related to practices intended to minimize financial risk come from shipping. For example, in the second millennium BCE the Babylonians invented maritime loans that did not require repayment if the ship was lost (Carter 1979). The origins of modern property insurance practices that are not associated with maritime ventures can be traced back nearly 350 years, to the creation of the first fire mutual companies following the London fire of 1666. Benjamin Franklin started the first U.S. mutual fire insurance company in 1792. The devastating fires in U.S. cities during the 19th century bankrupted many insurance companies and fostered the use of objective assessments of risk using fire insurance maps, which displayed building footprints, construction materials, and location information. 

The modern approach to risk assessment&mdash;using complex models as well as extensive exposure and hazard data&mdash;came into being when computational resources became more powerful and more common. But even before the advent of computers, insurers seeking to track exposure and avoid unwanted concentrations of risk used pins on a map to mark the location of underwritten properties. Thus tracking risk using data on exposure and vulnerability is not a new practice.

The invention of computers and their adoption by government and industry set the stage for coupling exposure and vulnerability data with hazard models to generate risk estimates. Perhaps the first modern risk models were developed for managing flood risk and designing dams. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Hydrologic Engineering Center (HEC) was created in 1964 and released components of the first watershed models in 1966. The components needed to be run separately because of memory limitations in computers. The integrated version of the model, HEC-1 Flood Hydrograph Package, was released in 1968. At that time, releasing the integrated model components as a package was considered a major innovation that allowed linked, related programs to be run without direct handling of intermediate results (HEC 1989).

Other risk assessment&mdash;related efforts were also taking place during the late 1960s and early 1970s. During this period, for example, C. Allin Cornell (1968) published the seminal methodology for seismic risk assessment; efforts at assessing hurricane risk for NASA's Apollo project were under way (Jarvinen, Neumann, and Davis 1984); and the catastrophe risk models for a range of natural hazards were under development for use by insurers (Friedman 1972).

Risk modelling became more common as computational resources expanded. In 1981 the first catastrophe risk modelling company, EQE International, was founded. The company provided catastrophic risk management consulting, design, and research services to commercial, utility, nuclear, and other high-tech industries. The two other major catastrophe risk modelling firms, Applied Insurance Research (AIR) and Risk Management Solutions (RMS), were formed in 1987 and 1989, respectively. While catastrophe risk models provided objective assessment of risk, until the early 1990s much of the insurance industry still based many business decisions on actuarial approaches using historical data. The use of catastrophe risk models in the insurance industry grew dramatically after Hurricane Andrew struck Florida in 1992 and insured losses turned out to be much greater than those expected based on historical experience. Using its hurricane risk model rather than an actuarial approach, AIR estimated insured losses that were much larger than any experienced in the past and closer to those actually experienced by the insurance industry. The difference between experience-based and model-derived loss estimates was driven in part by dramatic increases in exposure along the coast and by the limited sample of hurricane events in the historical record. Today, many insurers and reinsurers have in-house capacity to undertake their own probabilistic catastrophic modelling.

Emergency management agencies also began to adopt risk models for risk assessment in the 1990s. In 1997 the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) released Hazus97, the first version of Hazards US (Hazus), a geographic information system (GIS)&mdash;based natural hazard loss estimation software package. The output from Hazus includes factors such as shelter needs related to emergency management. The Hazus model has been adopted for use by emergency management organizations outside the United States, in countries such as Singapore, Canada, Australia, and Pakistan. 

During the first decade of the 21st century, there was growing awareness that risk assessments could help countries develop tools and strategies to reduce disaster losses, and thus several efforts to develop risk models were initiated. Governments have increasingly started to use risk modelling to assess their exposure to natural events, and in particular to use probabilistic risk modelling techniques, which manage uncertainty by providing a robust measure of risk and which allow for comparisons of risk. 

In 2004 New Zealand began to develop RiskScape, a regional multi-hazard risk model; Australia similarly began development of seismic, cyclone, and tsunami risk models; and in 2007 a partnership of Central American governments and development institutions began work on CAPRA (Central American Probabilistic Risk Assessment). Many of these models were developed to be open source and have led to large developer communities. In addition to these initially regional efforts, the decade also saw efforts to develop global models. The Global Earthquake Model (GEM), for example, was conceived in 2006; the GEM Foundation was officially formed in March of 2009; and the first official release of the GEM OpenQuake platform is slated for 2014 (for more on GEM, see section 3-6). The international development community also joined this effort, beginning in 2005 with collaboration under the ProVention Consortium by the World Bank and Columbia University, along with a number of additional contributors, including the Norwegian Geotechnical Institute (Dilley et al. 2005). This collaboration in turn spurred related efforts, such as the Global Risk Identification Programme (GRIP) of the United Nations Development Programme, followed by the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction's work on a new global probabilistic model in 2011 (described in more detail in section 3-6).

Today, there are more than 100 freely available risk models across the range of hazards. While many of these remain the domain of the experienced scientist or engineer, and are poorly suited to city or government officials responsible for managing disaster risk, a growing number of more user-friendly models are becoming available, such as the InaSAFE tool developed through a collaboration between the Indonesian and Australian governments and GFDRR&mdash;World Bank (see section 3-22 for more detail). Researchers are also beginning to couple probabilistic risk models with predictions of climate change to account for future changes in hazard and risk (see for example sections 3-23 and 3-24). This approach is likely to become the norm in future assessments.