## The Rise of Open Models and Data: The Changing Risk Assessment Paradigm

Over the last five years, the field of risk assessment has been increasingly driven by open data and open source modelling. The reasons for this evolution are multifold:

+ .Producing risk information requires a substantial investment in time, money, and effort, and those commissioning it are no longer satisfied with a published report as the sole end result. The real value is increasingly seen in the data that make the risk analysis possible, and in the various hazard and risk maps and analysis that can be further manipulated and used in a variety of contexts.
+ .The rapid changes in urban environments, in populations, and in extreme weather events require that risk information be dynamic and updated frequently. Access to open data and modelling tools allows dynamic risk assessment to be carried out by resource-poor governments and communities.
+ .There is a global movement toward open data, which seeks to increase government transparency and accountability and to broaden participation in governance. This effort can be seen in the establishment of initiatives such as the Open Government Partnership, whose 63 member governments have pledged accountability to their citizens. In addition, development institutions such as the World Bank, the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), and the African Development Bank view openness as a means to make the development process more inclusive and transparent.
+ .Open data and open models promote a level of transparency in risk assessment that represents an appealing change from the past, when assumptions, data sets, and methodologies, along with the associated uncertainties, were invisible to the end-user.
+ .Driven originally by citizens frustrated by lack of access to fundamental maps in the United Kingdom, there is a surge in interest in community or participatory mapping that has now become a global revolution led by the OpenStreetMap community (box 1-2).

In addition, as demand grows for risk information at resolutions appropriate for community and city decision making, the need to collect exposure data at these resolutions has also grown. Crowdsourcing is increasingly being viewed by governments and communities as a solution that enables bottom-up participation in the understanding of risk and a cost-effective solution to an otherwise expensive challenge of data collection. An example of this approach is highlighted in box 1-3.

To be considered open, models and data should be both legally and technically open (see figure 1-1). As development and use of open tools grows, the need to clarify and standardize the meaning of "open" will become more pressing. Box 1-4 describes how one initiative, the Global Earthquake Model, resolved differences of opinion about "open." 