<blockquote>Earthquakes, droughts, floods and storms are natural hazards, but unnatural disasters are deaths and damages that result from human acts of omission and commission. Every disaster is unique, but each exposes actions&mdash;by individuals and governments at different levels&mdash;that, had they been different, would have resulted in fewer deaths and less damage. 
__&mdash;World Bank and United Nations, Natural Hazards, UnNatural Disasters__</blockquote>

A disaster-related risk assessment provides an opportunity **before** a disaster event to determine the likely deaths, damages, and losses (direct and indirect) that will result, and to highlight which actions will be most effective in reducing the impacts on individuals, communities, and governments. This ability to model disaster loss and to provide robust analysis on the costs and benefits of risk preparedness, reduction, and avoidance has made disaster risk assessments a powerful tool in disaster risk management (DRM). As a result, the number of risk assessments being undertaken is growing, innovation has flourished, and a vast array of approaches, experiences, and lessons learned now exists.

Experience has shown that a disaster risk assessment does not represent the conclusion of a process, but instead provides a foundation for a long-term engagement focused on the communication and use of the risk information. Proactive responses to new risk information include retrofitting buildings to withstand the assessed seismic risk, developing new land-use plans, designing financial protection measures, and equipping and training emergency responders.  
In the context of rapidly growing disaster losses and high-profile catastrophic disasters, it is often difficult to imagine reducing the impact from hazard events. However, societies have successfully overcome similar challenges in the past. For centuries, urban fires were a global concern for the public, private, and finance sectors, as well as for the communities directly affected. Urban fires devastated Rome in 64 CE, London in 1666, Moscow in 1812, Chicago in 1871, and Boston in 1872; the 1906 San Francisco fire destroyed nearly 95 percent of the city, and the Tokyo fire of 1923 killed over 40,000 people. Yet we do not see urban fires any more, and this hazard has largely been consigned to history. The reasons&mdash; implementation of modern building codes, land-use planning, establishment and expansion of emergency services, greater citizen responsibility, and insurance regulations&mdash;are essentially the same levers that we can apply to consigning natural disaster events to history.  

We have already seen construction practices evolving in response to cyclones and earthquakes, and some areas have strict urban and land-use plans designed to reduce loss from flood. California, for example, has implemented a series of building code changes in response to earthquake<sup>9</sup>&mdash;changes that today represent a reduction in risk. Recent earthquakes in Chile, New Zealand, and Japan have dramatically demonstrated the influence of enforced building codes in reducing death, damage, and loss. These examples show that a society can reduce vulnerability and risk. But for these efforts to succeed, there must be robust and accessible information on hazard, exposure, and vulnerability, models that integrate this information and quantify risk, and the commitment and resources to prioritize actions needed to implement risk reduction.
The World Bank's approach to investment in DRM through better risk information is summarized in box 1-1. 

## About This Publication
This publication was developed to help identify the progress made in risk assessment under the 10-year Hyogo Framework for Action and to capture through use-case analysis the diverse efforts made to improve our awareness and understanding of risk. It is not a technical guide on how to undertake a risk assessment and instead offers a narrative to a nontechnical audience interested in how risk information can lead to more resilient communities, cities, and countries. The authors are aware that this publication does not capture all the engagements and projects on risk assessment across the globe or all the innovations and advances that have taken place. However, it does provide both a snapshot of use cases for those interested in application of risk assessment and some recommendations for the future.

The report begins with an overview and is then divided in four parts.

///Overview./// This section summarizes the report's key themes, observations, and recommendations in order to prompt policy dialogue and discussions among funders of risk assessment projects.

///I. Introduction./// This section describes the history of risk assessment, the recent rise of open data and open risk modelling, and the alignment of risk assessments to different DRM applications.

///II. Progress, Achievements, and Remaining Challenges in Risk Assessment./// Based on research and on submissions from and discussions with experts, this section captures key achievements and progress in different aspects of risk assessment in the last decade&mdash;from availability of fundamental data sets, to modelling tools, to new platforms that facilitate collaboration. This section also articulates remaining challenges that need focus over coming years.
III. Case Studies Highlighting Emerging Best Practices. This section showcases risk assessment initiatives from around the world, grouped according to their focus on one of the following: data; modelling; risk assessment in practice; institutionalization and communication of risk information; assessment of future risk.

///IV. Recommendations./// Based on recommendations received from developers and users of risk information and on emerging best practices, this section offers 10 recommendations for future investment in risk assessment.

## A Brief History of Risk Assessment

Societies have been dealing with risk for thousands of years. The earliest records related to practices intended to minimize financial risk come from shipping. For example, in the second millennium BCE the Babylonians invented maritime loans that did not require repayment if the ship was lost (Carter 1979). The origins of modern property insurance practices that are not associated with maritime ventures can be traced back nearly 350 years, to the creation of the first fire mutual companies following the London fire of 1666. Benjamin Franklin started the first U.S. mutual fire insurance company in 1792. The devastating fires in U.S. cities during the 19th century bankrupted many insurance companies and fostered the use of objective assessments of risk using fire insurance maps, which displayed building footprints, construction materials, and location information. 

The modern approach to risk assessment&mdash;using complex models as well as extensive exposure and hazard data&mdash;came into being when computational resources became more powerful and more common. But even before the advent of computers, insurers seeking to track exposure and avoid unwanted concentrations of risk used pins on a map to mark the location of underwritten properties. Thus tracking risk using data on exposure and vulnerability is not a new practice.

The invention of computers and their adoption by government and industry set the stage for coupling exposure and vulnerability data with hazard models to generate risk estimates. Perhaps the first modern risk models were developed for managing flood risk and designing dams. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Hydrologic Engineering Center (HEC) was created in 1964 and released components of the first watershed models in 1966. The components needed to be run separately because of memory limitations in computers. The integrated version of the model, HEC-1 Flood Hydrograph Package, was released in 1968. At that time, releasing the integrated model components as a package was considered a major innovation that allowed linked, related programs to be run without direct handling of intermediate results (HEC 1989).

Other risk assessment&mdash;related efforts were also taking place during the late 1960s and early 1970s. During this period, for example, C. Allin Cornell (1968) published the seminal methodology for seismic risk assessment; efforts at assessing hurricane risk for NASA's Apollo project were under way (Jarvinen, Neumann, and Davis 1984); and the catastrophe risk models for a range of natural hazards were under development for use by insurers (Friedman 1972).

Risk modelling became more common as computational resources expanded. In 1981 the first catastrophe risk modelling company, EQE International, was founded. The company provided catastrophic risk management consulting, design, and research services to commercial, utility, nuclear, and other high-tech industries. The two other major catastrophe risk modelling firms, Applied Insurance Research (AIR) and Risk Management Solutions (RMS), were formed in 1987 and 1989, respectively. While catastrophe risk models provided objective assessment of risk, until the early 1990s much of the insurance industry still based many business decisions on actuarial approaches using historical data. The use of catastrophe risk models in the insurance industry grew dramatically after Hurricane Andrew struck Florida in 1992 and insured losses turned out to be much greater than those expected based on historical experience. Using its hurricane risk model rather than an actuarial approach, AIR estimated insured losses that were much larger than any experienced in the past and closer to those actually experienced by the insurance industry. The difference between experience-based and model-derived loss estimates was driven in part by dramatic increases in exposure along the coast and by the limited sample of hurricane events in the historical record. Today, many insurers and reinsurers have in-house capacity to undertake their own probabilistic catastrophic modelling.

Emergency management agencies also began to adopt risk models for risk assessment in the 1990s. In 1997 the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) released Hazus97, the first version of Hazards US (Hazus), a geographic information system (GIS)&mdash;based natural hazard loss estimation software package. The output from Hazus includes factors such as shelter needs related to emergency management. The Hazus model has been adopted for use by emergency management organizations outside the United States, in countries such as Singapore, Canada, Australia, and Pakistan. 

During the first decade of the 21st century, there was growing awareness that risk assessments could help countries develop tools and strategies to reduce disaster losses, and thus several efforts to develop risk models were initiated. Governments have increasingly started to use risk modelling to assess their exposure to natural events, and in particular to use probabilistic risk modelling techniques, which manage uncertainty by providing a robust measure of risk and which allow for comparisons of risk. 

In 2004 New Zealand began to develop RiskScape, a regional multi-hazard risk model; Australia similarly began development of seismic, cyclone, and tsunami risk models; and in 2007 a partnership of Central American governments and development institutions began work on CAPRA (Central American Probabilistic Risk Assessment). Many of these models were developed to be open source and have led to large developer communities. In addition to these initially regional efforts, the decade also saw efforts to develop global models. The Global Earthquake Model (GEM), for example, was conceived in 2006; the GEM Foundation was officially formed in March of 2009; and the first official release of the GEM OpenQuake platform is slated for 2014 (for more on GEM, see section 3-6). The international development community also joined this effort, beginning in 2005 with collaboration under the ProVention Consortium by the World Bank and Columbia University, along with a number of additional contributors, including the Norwegian Geotechnical Institute (Dilley et al. 2005). This collaboration in turn spurred related efforts, such as the Global Risk Identification Programme (GRIP) of the United Nations Development Programme, followed by the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction's work on a new global probabilistic model in 2011 (described in more detail in section 3-6).

Today, there are more than 100 freely available risk models across the range of hazards. While many of these remain the domain of the experienced scientist or engineer, and are poorly suited to city or government officials responsible for managing disaster risk, a growing number of more user-friendly models are becoming available, such as the InaSAFE tool developed through a collaboration between the Indonesian and Australian governments and GFDRR&mdash;World Bank (see section 3-22 for more detail). Researchers are also beginning to couple probabilistic risk models with predictions of climate change to account for future changes in hazard and risk (see for example sections 3-23 and 3-24). This approach is likely to become the norm in future assessments.

## The Rise of Open Models and Data: The Changing Risk Assessment Paradigm

Over the last five years, the field of risk assessment has been increasingly driven by open data and open source modelling. The reasons for this evolution are multifold:

+ .Producing risk information requires a substantial investment in time, money, and effort, and those commissioning it are no longer satisfied with a published report as the sole end result. The real value is increasingly seen in the data that make the risk analysis possible, and in the various hazard and risk maps and analysis that can be further manipulated and used in a variety of contexts.
+ .The rapid changes in urban environments, in populations, and in extreme weather events require that risk information be dynamic and updated frequently. Access to open data and modelling tools allows dynamic risk assessment to be carried out by resource-poor governments and communities.
+ .There is a global movement toward open data, which seeks to increase government transparency and accountability and to broaden participation in governance. This effort can be seen in the establishment of initiatives such as the Open Government Partnership, whose 63 member governments have pledged accountability to their citizens. In addition, development institutions such as the World Bank, the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), and the African Development Bank view openness as a means to make the development process more inclusive and transparent.
+ .Open data and open models promote a level of transparency in risk assessment that represents an appealing change from the past, when assumptions, data sets, and methodologies, along with the associated uncertainties, were invisible to the end-user.
+ .Driven originally by citizens frustrated by lack of access to fundamental maps in the United Kingdom, there is a surge in interest in community or participatory mapping that has now become a global revolution led by the OpenStreetMap community (box 1-2).

In addition, as demand grows for risk information at resolutions appropriate for community and city decision making, the need to collect exposure data at these resolutions has also grown. Crowdsourcing is increasingly being viewed by governments and communities as a solution that enables bottom-up participation in the understanding of risk and a cost-effective solution to an otherwise expensive challenge of data collection. An example of this approach is highlighted in box 1-3.

To be considered open, models and data should be both legally and technically open (see figure 1-1). As development and use of open tools grows, the need to clarify and standardize the meaning of "open" will become more pressing. Box 1-4 describes how one initiative, the Global Earthquake Model, resolved differences of opinion about "open." 

## Aligning and Targeting Risk Assessments 
Risk assessment as applied to DRM can easily be framed around the formula __risk = hazard X exposure X vulnerability__.<sup>10</sup> Under this single formula, however, there is considerable variation in the types of and purposes for risk assessment. In the DRM community, risk assessments are generally undertaken for one (or more) of five reasons:

1. .Risk identification. Understanding, communicating, and raising awareness of disaster risk
2. .Risk reduction. Informing policies, investments, and structural and nonstructural measures intended to reduce risk
3. .Preparedness. Informing early warning systems and emergency measures and supporting preparedness and contingency planning at various levels
4. .Financial protection. Developing financial applications to manage and/or transfer risk.
5. .Resilient reconstruction. Informing early and rapid estimates of damage and providing critical information for reconstruction

Determining what constitutes a suitable risk assessment product depends not only on the purpose of the assessment, but on a number of other factors as well: which decision makers and stakeholders are involved, how the results will be used, the scale and resolution at which the assessment will be carried out, the data requirements for the assessment, the complexity of the analysis, and the resources available. Table 1-1 lists a range of assessment products for various purposes, each with different attributes.

Experience has shown that when a risk assessment is well targeted to a purpose and end-user, it has a greater chance of success&mdash;that is, the information it generates is more likely to be used for decision making. It is therefore critical that there be consensus on a risk assessment's objective, that it be designed to meet the project's basic requirements and standards, and that it not exceed available resources (money, personnel, time).

To understand how various factors influence risk assessment design, consider two different risk assessment products, one a community-based assessment that aims to engage communities in disaster risk reduction, to communicate risk, and to promote local action (second row of table 1-1), and the other a catastrophic risk assessment for financial planning (bottom row). The community-based assessment involves local stakeholders&mdash;communities and local government&mdash;and can be used in building community preparedness, supporting contingency planning, and identifying vulnerable assets. On the other hand, it cannot be used in developing financial applications and will seldom be used in planning significant investments in risk reduction, or in carrying out land-use planning. In contrast, a catastrophic risk assessment for financial planning involves a different set of stakeholders&mdash;ministries of finance, international and domestic financial markets, modelling companies, and insurance and reinsurance companies&mdash;and is carried out on a larger (national to multi-country) scale using high-quality, high-resolution data. This type of analysis is rarely used for local DRM or community preparedness.<sup>11</sup>


