# Case Studies Highlighting Emerging Best Practices
Demonstrated success is one of the best ways to illustrate the benefits associated with risk assessment and show how emerging efforts can contribute to further success. This section reviews a variety of case studies describing ongoing and emerging open efforts that support risk assessments and successful examples of completed risk assessments. The contributions are roughly grouped into those focused on data; those focused on modelling; those that describe specific risk assessment projects; those that focus on participation, collaboration, and communication; and those that address the future of risk. Given that many case studies speak to some or all of these aspects, however, there is a fair amount of overlap across categories.
## Data for Risk
### Open Data for Resilience Initiative (OpenDRI)
*John Crowley, Vivien Deparday (GFDRR); Robert Soden, Abigail Baca, Ariel Nunez (World Bank)*

Risk assessments never start from a blank slate; instead they build on existing data, analysis, and historical experience. All too frequently, the data sets that are required are incomplete, out-of-date, and ill-suited to the analysis required. Moreover, data are often in forms that prevent them from being shared widely, and they therefore remain latent and inaccessible (even across ministries and municipalities within the same country). Some are blocked by technologies that lock data into proprietary ecosystems. Most are stoppered by policies that prevent release beyond small groups or are simply fragmented into bureaucratic silos that require significant investment to assemble back into a whole picture.

Yet even fusing these existing data stocks into a usable form is not enough, as the data need to capture a dynamic reality. Rapid urbanization, population growth, and increasingly climate change mean that the analysis of the potential impacts of natural hazards needs to updated more frequently and at higher resolutions than ever before. In a time of economic hardship and unequal globalization, few governments possess the resources to collate existing data or collect new data, or to analyze data and communicate the results to decision makers able to implement projects that get ahead of the disaster cycle.

Because individual governments may not currently have the capacity to take on this work, however, does not mean that it cannot be accomplished. The task of stewarding data about shared risks should be understood as a collective effort, one engaging governments, civil society, industry, and individuals. That understanding is behind the Open Data for Resilience Initiative (OpenDRI), a growing partnership of institutions that was launched by the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR) and the World Bank in 2010, and designed to make data available to those who need information about disaster risks in order to make decisions. OpenDRI offers governments and their partners a process for cataloging their existing stocks of data and placing certain types of data under open licenses that still enable ministries to retain stewardship. The initiative also offers an inexpensive method of engaging at-risk communities in the process of mapping about their changing exposure to natural hazards. Finally, it offers a way to build ecosystems of entrepreneurs, researchers, and international institutions around data that a nation manages for itself.
#### The OpenDRI approach to managing risk data.
Since 2010, the GFDRR has worked with the World Bank to implement OpenDRI in over 20 countries, including Indonesia, Haiti, Nepal, Sri Lanka, and Malawi. The program is designed to build the necessary data for quantifying and mapping risk and for communicating the results to a wide range of decision makers at various levels, from national to community. The OpenDRI team works with governments to harness the value of open data practices in the service of more effective disaster risk management (DRM) and climate change adaptation.

OpenDRI projects offer a menu of approaches for building and using risk data and information: 
- *Collation and sharing of data and information through open geospatial catalogs*. Here local partners are supported to identify, prepare, and release existing hazard, exposure, and risk data via an online geospatial catalog. Recognizing a need to move away from proprietary software platforms, GFDRR and the World Bank have been active in leading and developing the open source platform GeoNode (http://geonode.org/), which provides tools that allow users to upload, visualize, and share data as well as simply produce maps. The platform also enables clients to federate multiple GeoNodes so that each ministry can retain custody of the data and choose which data sets are made available through open licenses. Figure 9 highlights GeoNodes supported by GFDRR and the World Bank. 
- *Collection of exposure data with participatory mapping*. Participatory mapping, also known as crowdsourcing and volunteer geospatial information, provides a way for countries and cities to create fundamental data on their infrastructure, including attributes such as building vintage, construction materials, elevation, use, and number of stories—information critical for quantifying risk. Here support is provided to communities and governments to build this asset database from the bottom up, by (for example) collecting data through open platforms like OpenStreetMap (OSM). Under this approach OpenDRI has sought to build the capacity of national OSM chapters and train them to collect data about the exposure of the built environment to natural hazards. OpenDRI has supported the collection of data on millions of buildings during its programs.
- *Catalyzing open data ecosystems*. The development of a community around DRM data is critical for fostering information sharing, providing training, and creating the network of decision makers who apply data to understanding their risks from natural hazards and climate change. This work includes establishing a community of technologists and organizers who build applications and tools using risk data at “hackathons”—such as the 2014 Code for Resilience, which builds on previous Random Hacks of Kindness activities.<sup>26</sup> Moreover, there is a realization that the OpenDRI program requires many actors all striving toward a collective vision and goal, so efforts to engage with a wide range of public, private, and academic stakeholders to meet collective challenges—for example, improving access to appropriate-resolution digital elevation models—are a fundamental part of this program.
- *Creating tools for communication of risk*. It has long been recognized that the communication of risk results to different users is a significant challenge in the global effort and one that has received insufficient attention. Support to the development of InaSAFE (described below in the case study “InaSAFE: Preparing Communities to Be One Step Ahead”) is one example of efforts to overcome this challenge.

[Figure 9]

Box 18 offers an example of the collaborative effort possible under OpenDRI—specifically, the efforts mobilized in the aftermath of Typhoon Yolanda (Haiyan).

[Box 18]

#### Challenges remain. 
Many governments have worked with partners to aggregate and centralize some portion of the data that they generate through comprehensive stock takings. However, these efforts have often failed or faltered, generally because governments perceive that sharing data means giving up control over it and losing the opportunity to make money (or gain other benefits) from it. (The loss of revenue when data are shared is a concern not only for governments, but also for the small GIS consultancies that make a living selling their data to local, provincial, and national government officials.)

Risk assessment and the need for data about potential disasters represent an easier entry point into discussions about open data than many other thematic areas (such as budget accountability), because there are often more champions where disasters are concerned, and it is easier to appeal to stakeholders’ altruism. This ongoing work is rarely easy or straightforward. Opening data for wider use can raise fears, create uncertainty, and break power structures that control data flows. For this reason, OpenDRI works to empower local champions and help them build a community of leaders to advance the principles of open data, which in turn contribute to making societies more resilient. An OpenDRI field guide (Crowley 2014), which captures the experiences and lessons learned over four years of implementation and provides a practical guide for other partners, was launched in March 2014. A case study of the local application of OpenDRI is given in the subsequent section on Open Cities. 
### Open Cities: Application of the Open Data for Resilience Initiative in South Asia and the Lessons Learned<sup>27</sup>
*Robert Soden, Nama Raj Budhathoki, Marc Forni (World Bank); Vivien Deparday (GFDRR)*

South Asia is one of the most rapidly urbanizing regions in the world. Growing populations, unplanned settlements, and unsafe building practices all increase disaster risk in the region. As urban populations and vulnerability grow, promoting urban growth that is resilient to natural hazards and the impacts of climate change becomes an ever-greater challenge. 

The Open Cities project constitutes one effort to meet this challenge. Launched by the World Bank and the GFDRR in November 2012, it aims to create open data ecosystems that will facilitate data-driven urban planning and DRM in South Asian cities and builds on the practices and tools developed under OpenDRI. Open Cities has brought together stakeholders from government, donor agencies, the private sector, universities, and civil society groups to create usable information through community mapping, build applications and tools to inform decision making, and develop the networks of trust and social capital necessary for these efforts to become sustainable. This process has been evolutionary, with opportunities for experimentation, learning, failure, and adaptation incorporated into the project planning.

Open Cities approaches risk assessment differently from catastrophic risk modelling firms, whose data are typically used by the insurance industry or for specific portfolio analysis. Professional assessments often involve computationally intensive modelling analysis, but they also tend to rely on statistical representations, proxies, or estimations of the exposed assets, which are expressed in monetary terms. These data are insufficient for driving specific investments to reduce disaster risk, because individual assets are typically not accurately located, described, and valued. By contrast, the Open Cities platform engages local expertise and stakeholders in identifying all building structures in a city and assigning vulnerability attributes to each. In this way, a risk assessment that identifies particular structures at risk can be completed. An assessment with this degree of precision is able to identify structures based on importance and risk level, and can therefore guide plans to reduce disaster and climate risk through physical investments. 
#### Drawing upon experiences from Haiti and Indonesia. 
Open Cities was inspired by two other projects involving community mapping, the OpenStreetMap response to the 2010 Haiti earthquake (described in the next case study, “Preliminary Survey of Government Engagement with Volunteered Geographic Information”) and the Community Mapping for Exposure effort by the Australian and Indonesian governments (described below in the case study “Collection of Exposure Data to Underpin Natural Hazard Risk Assessments in Indonesia and the Philippines”). Like these efforts, Open Cities made use of the OSM platform to harness the power of crowd and community to create accurate and up-to-date spatial data about the location and characteristics of the built and natural environments. 

Using lessons learned from these projects in Haiti and Indonesia, Open Cities employs a scalable approach to understanding urban challenges and disaster risk in South Asian cities. Three cities were chosen for the initial work: Batticaloa, Sri Lanka; Dhaka, Bangladesh; and Kathmandu, Nepal. These cities were chosen for their high levels of disaster risk, the presence of World Bank activities related to urban planning and disaster management that would benefit from access to better data, and the willingness of government counterparts to participate in, and help guide, the interventions. Open Cities has sought to support the creation of new data in each of these projects, but has also supported broader ecosystems of open data production and use in the three cities. Leveraging data to improve urban planning and DRM decisions requires not just high-quality information, but also the requisite tools, skills, and willingness to commit to a data-driven decision-making process. With this in mind, Open Cities also sought to develop partnerships across government ministries, donor agencies, universities, private sector technology groups, and civil society organizations to ensure broad acceptance of the data produced, facilitate data usage, and align investments in risk reduction across projects and sectors. With the first phase of Open Cities complete in each of the projects, these partnerships will be critical for continuing the work and expanding into new cities in the region.

####Case study: Batticaloa, Sri Lanka. 
Batticaloa, a major city in Sri Lanka’s Eastern Province severely affected by the Sri Lankan civil war and the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami, is located in a hazard-prone area that has suffered near-annual droughts, floods, and cyclones. Some limited hazard maps were available for the area, but no detailed digital geographic data of the built environment were available for use in risk studies or for informing potential infrastructure and risk mitigation projects. To fill this gap, Open Cities started a pilot project to map the building stock, including critical assets of the Manmunai North Divisional Secretariat, which covers an area of 68km2 and includes about 90,000 people around the town of Batticaloa. The work began with a series of meetings with the Batticaloa local authorities. In part, these were designed to establish the close collaboration needed to carry out the actual mapping. But they were also meant to ensure local understanding of and trust in the mapping process and in the data produced, so as to encourage local authorities to use the tools and data for their own DRM and urban planning projects.

A team of four technical experts (three recent GIS and IT graduates and one experienced GIS analyst) was hired and trained in OSM techniques in order to supervise and support the overall mapping process. Team members worked directly with the staff from local partners, including the Batticaloa Municipal Council, the Batticaloa District, the Manmunai North Divisional Secretariat, and the 48 Grama Niladhari that make up the Manmunai North Divisional Secretariat. A small group began by tracing all building outlines into OSM using satellite imagery and then added landmarks, roads and road names, and points of interests using local paper maps provided by the divisional secretariat. This effort created a solid reference map for the surveying work. The work was then split into two components: buildings were surveyed by 48 recent graduates hired to work on the Grama Niladhari local planning and development, and surveyed data were entered by government workers who were also responsible for fixing the maps and refining the point of interests. Both groups were trained in OSM and surveying techniques by the Open Cities team, and all the staff involved in the data collection received a stipend for the extra work. 

Data on basic characteristics (number of floors, usage, and construction materials of walls and roof) were collected for all 30,000 buildings in the area. These data are now freely available in OSM and in the government geospatial data-sharing platform RiskInfo (www.riskinfo.lk) for easy use by many stakeholders. To publicize the benefits of these techniques at the national level and promote their adoption, high-level managers of the relevant national agencies were briefed regularly and given final results when available. Two week-long training courses, one dealing with OSM techniques and the other with use of data for decision making (specifically the combination of data with existing hazard maps through GIS tools and the InaSAFE tool) were conducted at the national level with all relevant national agencies. Discussions are ongoing with various ministries concerning the next phase of the project. There is a strong interest in scaling up the project to cover a greater geographic area and in streamlining the use of the data in more DRM applications and sectors.
#### Case study: Dhaka, Bangladesh. 
Dhaka's Old City is a crowded and complex area of immense historical value and an important locus of social and economic activity. In consultation with Dhaka Water and Sanitation, seismic risk experts from Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology (BUET), and a local nongovernmental organization (NGO) working on heritage preservation and restoration in Old Dhaka, the Dhaka Open Cities pilot sought to create detailed maps of three of the Old City's 15 wards. These maps would provide data useful for planning evacuation routes, managing water and sanitation infrastructure, and understanding the location and characteristics of heritage buildings. In partnership with BUET, which provided technical support and a working space, 20 engineering and planning undergraduates were hired as mappers and were trained in a series of workshops over a three-month period. A local nonprofit GIS consulting organization, CEGIS, was contracted with to provide management and quality control for the work. The Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team (HOT), a nonprofit specializing in the use of OpenStreetMap in development and humanitarian relief situations, also provided training and technical oversight to the project.

The effort began by importing building footprint data for the three wards—created by CEGIS as part of a different project but until that point unavailable to the public—directly into OSM. This allowed the mapping team to focus on field surveying, in which basic characteristics, such as building height, usage, construction materials, and age were collected through visual survey of each building. The team also mapped road characteristics (width and surface type) along with important water and sanitation infrastructure. The data were added to OSM during times when conditions prohibited field surveys (e.g., poor weather conditions). Two weeks of training at the beginning of the project and a final two weeks of data entry and quality assessment at the end of the project left two months in the middle for fieldwork. During this period, the team was able to finish complete maps of the three wards. 

In total, 8,500 buildings, 540 of which were deemed to have historical significance, were surveyed. Sections of roads measuring 43km and drainage works measuring over 50km were also assessed. This information is now available to the public through the OSM platform. Several training courses and presentations on OSM were also given to university students, government partners, and private sector technology companies during the project period in order to help the OSM community in Dhaka grow. The results of the pilot were presented to the government and other key stakeholders in December 2013. Consultations are ongoing concerning the next phase of the project.
#### Case study: Kathmandu, Nepal.
Kathmandu, the capital city of Nepal, has very high potential for significant loss of human life during a major earthquake event.<sup>28</sup> In November  2012, in partnership with the government of Nepal, the World Bank and GFDRR launched a project to build seismic resilience in the Kathmandu Valley’s education and health infrastructure, in part by creating a disaster risk model to determine the relative vulnerability of the relevant buildings. Once complete, the model will be used to prioritize plans for retrofits of schools and health facilities to improve structural integrity in the face of earthquake. However, a critical input into this model is building-related exposure data.

World Bank staff and consultants began the year-long project by assembling a team of mappers and community mobilizers. The team was responsible for a variety of tasks, from field surveying to software development to training of community groups in OSM. The core team comprised six graduates of Kathmandu University who were recruited based on their prior contribution to Nepal’s then-nascent OSM community. They were paid full-time salaries at rates commensurate with the local salary structure for recent graduates in technical disciplines. The project also recruited six part-time interns from Kathmandu University and 11 volunteers from Tribhuvan University. Office space for the team provided access to meeting rooms, reliable Internet service, and opportunities to interact with other technologists and entrepreneurs, some of whom later became active in OpenStreetMap.

Open Cities Kathmandu surveyed 2,256 schools and 350 health facilities in the Kathmandu Valley. In addition to collecting a comprehensive list of structural data for health and school facilities, the team worked to create a comprehensive base map of the valley by digitizing building footprints, mapping the road network, and collecting information on other major points of interest. The Open Cities team also conducted significant outreach to universities, technical communities, and government in order to expand the OSM community. Over 2,300 individuals participated in OSM trainings or presentations during the first year of the project. The data have been used in plans to retrofit school and health facilities and in applications for transportation planning; moreover, the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) has incorporated the data into disaster preparedness planning exercises. The American Red Cross has also made substantial contributions to the OSM project in Kathmandu, suggesting the opportunities for partnerships between development organizations. A local NGO called the Kathmandu Living Labs, staffed by participants in the first phase of the Open Cities project, has been created in order to continue the work.
### Lessons learned and recommendations.
Although the Open Cities project is ongoing, several key lessons have already emerged that can be applied to other initiatives. 

1. **Government ownership is important**. Although many Open Cities partners and participants will be from civil society and the private sector, government counterparts in line ministries must be involved in projects’ development and execution. Engaging governments early in the planning process and ensuring close involvement throughout is an essential component of a successful Open Cities project. Governments are primary stakeholders for many DRM and urban planning projects and provide necessary legitimacy to Open Cities work. In Kathmandu, the involvement of the Department of Education in the mapping work will be critical for developing the department’s confidence in and use of the data to prioritize seismic retrofitting activities. An official letter in support of the project carried by mapping team members helped them gain the access to schools and health facilities that was needed for conducting their assessments. In Sri Lanka, the project deliberately involved local authorities directly in the mapping activities as a way to ensure government ownership of the project and the use of the data in various applications. 
2. **Universities make good partners**. Universities have been valuable allies during the first year of Open Cities work. Outreach to university departments of engineering, geography, computer science, and planning has provided projects with critical connections and support. In Dhaka and Kathmandu, university students have played an important role in mapping activities and software development. Students from technical departments tend to learn OSM quickly, and some students in Kathmandu fulfilled a requirement to complete internships or volunteer projects through participating in Open Cities. University faculty have also provided useful support. In Dhaka, professors from the BUET Civil Engineering Department and Planning Department contributed to the design of the mapping project. Professors in the Geomatics Department at Kathmandu University provided guidance to the project on quality control techniques for surveying, and they also incorporated OSM into their courses. Training future classes of university students will help the OSM community in Kathmandu continue to grow after the formal project period has ended. 
3. **Access to imagery is critical**.As the work of Haiti’s OSM community made clear, access to high-resolution satellite imagery is extremely useful for efficient mapping of infrastructure. However, such imagery is often prohibitively expensive or available only under licenses that prohibit digitization by the public. With this in mind, the U.S. State Department's Humanitarian Information Unit launched an initiative in 2012 called Imagery to the Crowd, which makes high-resolution imagery owned by the U.S. government accessible to humanitarian organizations and the volunteer communities that support them. Open Cities Kathmandu partnered with USAID and Imagery to the Crowd to release 2012 satellite photography for the Kathmandu Valley and to organize volunteers in Nepal, the United Kingdom, Germany, and the United States to digitize building footprints. The data created by these volunteers have been incorporated into USAID disaster response planning, and they provided a solid foundation upon which the Nepali OSM community can continue to expand and improve. 
4. **Data must be trustworthy and credible**.Data quality is a frequently raised issue in community and volunteer mapping projects. Numerous measures were taken by the Open Cities project to ensure that partners and intended users of the data would trust the data’s accuracy and completeness. In Kathmandu, partner organizations—including the National Society for Earthquake Technology, a respected NGO working on seismic resilience, and the Kathmandu University Geomatics Department—provided technical guidance to the project as well as independent quality assessments throughout the process to provide credibility. In Dhaka, key stakeholders, including BUET and representatives of government and civil society, were consulted throughout the project, and many were given basic training in OSM in order to familiarize them with the platform.  
5. **Sustained engagement is required for success**.For these projects to be successful, sustained engagement with local partners is necessary. Too often technology and data projects of this sort are discrete and short-term endeavors. A workshop or a weeklong training course is simply not enough time to trigger the kinds of change that Open Cities hopes to support. Although OSM makes mapping more accessible to nonspecialists, collecting and interacting with geographic information remains a complex technical undertaking, one that requires more training and involves a longer learning process than is often assumed. It also takes time to build technical communities of OSM mappers and software developers who are familiar enough with the platform to comfortably deploy it in their own tools and applications—and creating these communities is an important part of sustaining Open Cities projects. Finally, Open Cities seeks to contribute to cultural and policy shifts within technical groups and government that will prioritize open data and broad participation in development challenges. When projects of this kind are planned, the parties involved must understand and commit to sustained investment in their success. 
   In its early phase, Open Cities has demonstrated success in engaging nontraditional institutions and community groups in the process of creating high-resolution spatial data that can be used in support of urban planning and resilience-building programs. There is still work to be done to establish direct links between the OSM data set and target users in and out of government, but the initial reception has been positive, and there is strong interest from a number of other development institutions in learning from the early experience and in partnering on future work. In the future, Open Cities will also seek to scale through expansion of the range of organizations involved in the work and explore launching new programs in cities in South Asia and other regions. 

### Preliminary Survey of Government Engagement with Volunteered Geographic Information
*Muki Haklay (University College London), Sofia Basiouka (National Technical University of Athens), Vyron Antoniou (Hellenic Military Geographical Service), Robert Soden (World Bank)*

When data and information are shared and part of open systems, they promote transparency and accountability, and ensure that a wide range of actors can participate in the challenge of building resilience. Arguably, one of the greatest revolutions in this open data space has been the increasingly active involvement of local people in geospatial data collection and maintenance—a process known as volunteered geographic information (VGI).  

A preliminary survey of government engagement with VGI was undertaken in order to strengthen governmental projects that incorporate voluntary and crowdsourced data collection and to provide information that can support wider adoption of VGI.<sup>29</sup> The survey compiles and distributes lessons learned and successful models from efforts by governments at different levels. The survey project began from the following premises: 
- Sources of VGI data such as OpenStreetMap are growing increasingly important across a range of thematic areas and user communities.
- Concerns about the quality, consistency, and completeness of VGI data have been assessed by a range of studies and overall have been found not serious enough to prevent exploration of VGI data as a valuable data source. 
- For governments, interacting with VGI communities is different and potentially more complex then interacting with typical sellers and resellers of GIS data.
- Designing strategies to encourage governments to engage with VGI efforts is not straightforward, and we are still learning from early experience what opportunities exist and what methodologies work well.

The survey project focuses on cases that demonstrate a synergy between government and citizens or civic society organizations. “Synergy” means a government authority’s clear use of contributed information to make decisions and take actions. Four case studies are highlighted: Canada’s interaction with OSM, Haiti’s interaction with the Humanitarian OSM Team, Indonesia’s experience with community mapping, and the U.S. State Department’s interaction with HOT.
#### Canada.
In Canada, the main duty of National Mapping Agencies is to provide up-to-date topographical maps and a range of spatial products to public and private sector. Likewise, the role of the Mapping Information Branch at Natural Resources Canada is to provide accurate geographic information on landmass at the scale of 1:50,000. This task involves regularly covering an area of 10 million km<ss>2<ss> divided into 13,200 map sheets. 

Taking into account the results of ongoing research regarding VGI quality, Canadian authorities choose to cooperate with the OSM community to see if and how the updating process could profit from the evolution of VGI. As Beaulieu, Begin, and Genest (2010) describe, the first step to this synergy was made by the Centre for Topographic Information in Sherbrooke, which released the digital topographic map of Canada in the native .osm format. This move enabled further integration of the Canadian authoritative data into OSM and gave the OSM community a chance to interact with—that is, complete, correct, or update—the authoritative data. In addition, authorities are now able to regularly compare the OSM database with the original data to pinpoint the differences (Figure 10). Those differences are treated as potential changes and are verified using the authoritative channel at the field. Verified changes are propagated to the authoritative database. 

[Figure 10]

On the positive side, the titanic work of keeping the data sets up-to-date has been facilitated by the OSM community. Leveraging the OSM crowdsourcing mechanism, the Canadian authorities have developed a much-needed change-detection process, which helps the authorities concentrate resources and effort on areas with identified changes. Given that the authoritative database had failed to update all the originally designed spatial entities, this contribution is valuable.  

Engaging with OSM has also presented challenges. Among the issues that must be addressed are the imperfect compatibility of the two data sets (in terms of semantics and attribution), the virtual nonexistence of metadata for OSM data, and the differences in coverage (OSM is concentrated in urban areas compared to the uniform authoritative coverage). All these differences stem from the differences in the two geographic information–generating processes—that is, the bottom-up and looser OSM process versus the top-down authoritative process. Yet another issue involves a conflict between license and use terms of OSM and the intellectual property rights of Canadian authorities. 

The Canadian and OSM synergy rests mainly on two pillars: the authorities’ recognition that they have been unable to keep the national data up-to-date, and their willingness to acknowledge and trust the quality of the OSM data. Another factor contributing to the synergy is that Canadian authorities are well organized and equipped and therefore have a standard process regarding spatial data collection, change detection, and spatial data quality control and quality assurance. They can easily handle the addition of OSM data in their processes, and the results are visible, understandable, and tangible. In other words, in this case, the context in which authoritative and non-authoritative entities interact is an important influence on how easy it is to integrate the two different spatial data sets.

The Canadian experience suggests several important lessons:
- An authority’s recognition that it needs assistance to meet its target can trigger the turn to VGI.
- VGI data sets can be used by authoritative and governmental bodies to supplement or facilitate their standard operational procedures. 
- Differences in structure and operation mean that updates to geographic information do not move freely between the two systems. 
- Different terms of use and license options for the two data sets can create connectivity problems. 

#### Haiti.
Haiti was dramatically affected by the 7.0 magnitude earthquake of January 12, 2010. Most estimates of deaths range from 100,000 to 159,000, with Haitian government reports of over 200,000 fatalities. More than 250,000 residents were injured and more than 30,000 buildings were collapsed or severely damaged. The Haitian government and the numerous nongovernmental organizations seeking to respond to the disaster lacked accurate and up-to-date maps to help guide their work. The only available spatial data were poor in content and had last been updated in the 1960s; moreover, the local mapping agency collapsed in the earthquake and many of the skilled employees were lost. An updated map was urgently needed to enable distribution of supplies, attention to collapsed buildings, repair of damaged infrastructure, and provision of medical services. 

The Haiti disaster response constitutes an example of a successful project in which geographic information was released from partners to the crowd for enhancement and then returned back to government for activation—although government was rather reluctant to involve volunteers. Historical maps, CIA maps, and high-resolution imagery in Yahoo were used for tracing in OSM so that the basic maps could be improved. Within 48 hours, new imagery from the World Bank, Google, and others was also made available for tracing in OSM. According to HOT, within a month, 600 volunteers had added spatial information to OSM, and OSM was used as a default base map for the response to the Haiti earthquake. Figure 11 shows volunteers involved in the mapping.

[Figure 11]

Four factors explain the success of this project: the quick creation of the data, the low cost, the numerous contributions of volunteers from the OSM community, and the public release of high-resolution satellite imagery. The first two factors were summarized by the opinion that the United Nations “would have taken tens of thousands of pounds and years to do what OpenStreetMap did in 3 weeks.” The third factor was the remote volunteers who acted quickly, coordinated their efforts, and disseminated the appeal for help all over the world. As Tim Waters puts it, “It is the first time where individuals from the comfort and safety of their own home can literally help other people save lives in a disaster zone.” A final key factor in the success of the project was the willingness of partners to provide spatial data and imagery free of license restrictions.

Despite the project’s overall success, several challenges should be highlighted. First, despite the efforts of HOT and others, the Haitian national mapping agency (CNIGS) was never fully involved in the project. This represented a missed opportunity to establish a richer connection between the Haitian government and the OSM community. Second, the number of volunteers involved in the digitization and the speed with which it occurred caused coordination difficulties, which in turn led to duplication of data and effort.

Undeniably, what OpenStreetMap did in Haiti changed both disaster response and perceptions of VGI forever. Overall, the Haitian experience suggests several important lessons:
- Crowdsourcing of mapping is a valuable ex post disaster response.
- Volunteers from the OSM community and the access to high-resolution imagery made the project a success. 
- Coordination among distributed volunteers involved in mapping is a challenge that needs to be addressed in order to ensure efficient use of their time.

#### Indonesia. 
The Indonesian community mapping of exposure project began in early 2011 and is still active (for more details, see the case study “Collection of Exposure Data to Underpin Natural Hazard Risk Assessments in Indonesia and the Philippines”). The project’s goal was to use OSM to collect previously unavailable data, including structural data, for both urban and rural buildings and use the data in appropriate models to estimate the potential damage from natural hazards. The combination of these two components and the use of realistic data led to the development of the InaSAFE tool (discussed in the case study “InaSAFE: Preparing Communities to Be a Step Ahead”). Figure 12 shows the Indonesian community mapping project under way.

[Figure 12]

The project was seen as successful from a human, technical, and financial point of view. It has enabled local government to use spatial data to visualize where people are most in danger (Chapman, Wibowo, and Nurwadjedil 2013). The community mapping component had clear leadership, specific guidelines in data manipulation, and great coordination of the different contributors. The crowd was motivated to participate (driven by a desire to improve disaster protection, win the mapping competition, or other reasons) and was supervised during the various stages of the process, and the process of data collection and manipulation was well defined. A factor contributing to the project’s success was the evaluation of the data by academics and project leaders. 

Some limitations of the project involve the quality of the results, which while acceptable overall and in some cases very good, was in some cases very poor (Gadjah Mada University and HOT 2012). There appeared to be many empty or wrong records concerning the structure of buildings. Some minor deficiencies were also noted during the implementation, such as the use of time-consuming technical methods (e.g., use of Excel spreadsheets in data collection or manual methods of data manipulation).

The Indonesian experience suggests several important lessons:
- An ex post response can be focused on appropriate models and parameters and can calculate the damages in case of a physical disaster by using crowdsourced spatial data sets. 
- Successful interaction between the VGI community and Indonesian government officials, who evaluated the data used for scenario building as reliable, led to the project’s being continued and expanded past the initial phase. 
- Risk managers and the local community can combine local wisdom with scientific knowledge to produce realistic scenarios for numerous different physical disasters that may occur at the area of interest. 
- The success of the project was due in part to the coordination of volunteers and full use of human resources and technical innovations. 
- The mixed quality of the attribute data is an issue of concern. 

#### Imagery to the Crowd. 
As shown in Haiti, facilitating the access of volunteer communities to high-quality aerial and satellite imagery can have dramatic results. Such imagery is often prohibitively expensive, however, or available only under licenses that would prevent digitization by the public. With this in mind, the U.S. State Department's Humanitarian Information Unit launched a new initiative in 2012 called Imagery to the Crowd. This program makes high-resolution imagery, purchased by the United States from providers like Digital Globe, accessible to humanitarian organizations and the volunteer communities that support them. Since its inception, Imagery to the Crowd has facilitated the digitization of basic infrastructure data into OSM in eight countries to support humanitarian response or disaster risk reduction.

Following the Typhoon Haiyan disaster in the Philippines in November 2013, Imagery to the Crowd published images for Tacloban, Ormoc, Northern Cebu, and Carles. This imagery supported a massive volunteer effort of over 1,600 mappers from the OSM community, coordinated by HOT, who contributed nearly 5 million changes to the map—changes that provided detailed information on the location and extents of pre-event infrastructure as well as offering a preliminary damage assessment (see Box 2 for more detail). 

Technical and policy efforts are under way to increase the speed at which imagery can be released and to standardize and improve the process, but this new initiative has already achieved demonstrable results. 
### Collection of Exposure Data to Underpin Natural Hazard Risk Assessments in Indonesia and the Philippines<sup>33</sup>
*A. T. Jones, K. Van Putten, M. Jakab (Geoscience Australia); M. L. Bautista, B. C. Bautista, I. C. Narag (Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology); A. Wibowo (Badan Nasional Penanggulangan Bencana); K. Chapman (Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team)*

Until recently, the scope and usefulness of risk assessments in the Asia-Pacific region were limited because the fundamental exposure data required were either missing or incompatible with the level of risk assessment required. But two projects in the region, one in Metro Manila and the other in Indonesia, have each found a way to develop much-needed exposure data.

In the Philippines, a state-of-the-art technological approach to collecting exposure data was used on an urban scale as part of the Greater Metro Manila Risk Assessment Project (GMMA RAP). This approach incorporated data from high-resolution aerial imagery (cm resolution) and airborne LiDAR (giving ground and building heights to mm accuracy) into GIS data sets to provide needed information about individual buildings’ location and size; it then added further information about building construction type, land-use classification, and residential population estimates. In Indonesia, a collaborative and cost-effective approach—crowdsourcing through OpenStreetMap—was used both to collect exposure data (including information on building type, building capacity, wall type, roof type, and number of stories) and to create a methodology that could be replicated across the entire country. 
**Philippines**. With the Office of Civil Defense acting as a coordinating agency, Geoscience Australia has worked with a group of government of Philippines technical agencies—known jointly as Collective Strengthening of Community Awareness for Natural Disasters (CSCAND)—to promote the goals of the Greater Metro Manila Area Risk Assessment Project.<sup>34</sup> The GMMA RAP was one of the first integrated multi-hazard probabilistic risk assessments ever undertaken for a megacity and included estimations of economic loss and potential casualties. The project was intended to provide a better understanding of exposure databases, including how to prepare them; to make exposure information available for analyzing natural hazard risk and climate change impacts in the Greater Metro Manila Area; to improve assessments of the risk of and impacts from flood (in the Pasig-Marikina River basin) and from tropical cyclone severe wind; and to improve the understanding of earthquake risk in the Greater Manila Metro Area.

To achieve its goals, GMMA RAP needed to address the challenge of gathering data in a heavily populated and highly complex urban environment. Attempting to acquire, manage, and maintain exposure information for every significant feature (there are over 1.5 million buildings, for example) was not practical given the limited available existing data and the three-year time frame of the project, and given the dearth of risk analysis tools able to handle very large volumes of exposure data.

The project team designed the GMMA RAP exposure database to make use of existing methods and draw on lessons learned in preparing exposure data for an earlier project on earthquake risk.<sup>35</sup> The database was populated with a range of data from other projects or already held by government of Philippines agencies, by Local Government Units, and by other organizations, and these were then enhanced with additional data. To support the process of developing data and offer local expertise and knowledge, a technical working group of specialists was established. Because acquiring and managing highly complex data is so difficult, and because detailed exposure data were unavailable for some areas of the Greater Metro Manila Area, the project adopted an area-based approach to exposure data development. This approach allowed data to be included in the database at a suitable level of detail while offering the flexibility to move to a feature-based approach as data became available. 

Statistical information on population and building type (e.g., from National Statistics Office Census data) was used to describe exposure characteristics for broadly defined areas (in this case, barangays, the smallest administrative division in the Philippines, equivalent to an inner-city neighborhood or suburb). This information was then supplemented with exposure data derived through a novel technological approach developed at Geoscience Australia, in which data from airborne LiDAR, which measures building heights very accurately, and high-resolution aerial imagery were incorporated into GIS models.<sup>36</sup>

Several additional data sets were derived from these LiDAR data, including a digital elevation model and a digital surface model. Both these data sets were generated with a 1m horizontal resolution to optimize them for spatial analysis. Where the digital elevation model and digital surface model were spatially coincident, the difference between their elevation values was the height of features above the ground. After vegetated areas were isolated from the derived features through analysis of aerial imagery that accompanied the LiDAR data, a model of artificial elevated areas—i.e., buildings—was left.

[Figure 13]

The extents and heights of buildings determined from the LiDAR data were then used to estimate the floor area of the buildings (which is ultimately used to determine the amount of damage a building will suffer if a hazard event occurs). The vertical distance between floors of buildings, also referred to as the inter-story height, was assumed for each relevant barangay, and this was used in conjunction with the areal extent of the building to calculate the floor area. Sample images are in Figure 13 and Figure 14. 

[Figure 14]

Finally, the collected (census) data and calculated (LiDAR) data were combined into statistical models for individual barangays based on land use. These formed the basis of the GMMA RAP exposure database and the economic loss calculations determined through the risk analysis. 
#### Crowdsourcing in Indonesia.
The Australia-Indonesia Facility for Disaster Reduction (AIFDR) initiative, which is a key part of Australia’s development program in Indonesia, collaborated with the Indonesian National Disaster Management Agency (Badan Nasional Penanggulangan Bencana, or BNPB), the GFDRR, and the World Bank to develop InaSAFE (see the case study “InaSAFE: Preparing Communities to Be One Step Ahead” for more detail). The requirement to provide a spatially independent product that could be applied anywhere across Indonesia meant it was not possible to underpin the risk models with a single exposure database, as was the case in the GMMA RAP. Instead, a partnership was formed to obtain location-specific exposure information that was at the right scale, up-to-date, and complete.

To determine if OSM could be used to map exposure in Indonesia—that is, provide exposure data for impact scenarios—a community mapping pilot was developed through collaboration with the Australian aid–funded Australian Community Development and Civil Society Strengthening Scheme (ACCESS) Phase II and the Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team (Chapman 2012). OSM provides communities with tools to quickly, simply, and easily map their environment; when mapping infrastructure, users can tag objects with information (for example, about use, wall type, roof type, capacity, etc.). This participatory mapping approach provides detailed, local-scale exposure information that can be used by governments and communities for developing impact assessments. It minimizes access and usability issues by employing low-tech approaches that are easy to carry out (for example, it uses paper maps with digital imagery that can later be uploaded into a database); and because it engages communities in mapping their own vulnerability, it has the added benefit of increasing their sense of ownership over resultant impact assessments.  

This pilot was a first attempt to use OSM to collect detailed exposure and vulnerability data and then feed it into scientific models to determine how a disaster would affect a specific location. An evaluation of OSM data showed that for the 163,912 buildings mapped in Indonesia, results were not significantly different from ground-truthed and referenced data (Gadjah Mada University and HOT 2012).

Figure 15 shows the increase in exposure data over time for three locations in Indonesia being mapped by OSM. The first location was Dompu, in Sumbawa (top row of figure). The second location was Jakarta (middle row), where AIFDR and HOT partnered with DKI–Jakarta Regional Disaster Management Agency, UNOCHA, World Bank, and University of Indonesia to map critical infrastructure through district workshops that captured local knowledge from urban village heads. The third location was Padang (bottom row), where HOT asked volunteers to use its online tasking manager (developed to help large groups of volunteers to map in one area without overlap or conflicting contributions) and where in two months, volunteers mapped 100,000 buildings. 

[Figure 15]

Since the end of the pilot in March 2012, over 1.3 million buildings have been mapped in Indonesia with OSM, over 900 Indonesians have been trained in the use of the software, and three universities have begun to teach OSM within their GIS program.
#### Conclusions. 
These two examples demonstrate different approaches to capturing exposure data where budgets, time frames, and human resources are limited, and where existing data are limited as well. Within this context, approaches to acquiring exposure data depend on the scale, purpose, and end-users of the risk assessment being undertaken, as well as on factors specific to the assessment’s location. The examples suggest, however, that procedures for collecting data may be useful for a range of applications if they are well thought out and based on a consultative process involving technical experts, decision makers, and disaster managers.

Indeed, the project in Indonesia has since been used as a template for similar endeavors worldwide and as a model for coordinating and structuring a crowdsourcing project. It is also an example of how developing countries can protect themselves from or prevent natural disasters. The project succeeded because it was supported by the local government with money and time depth; its methodology was adapted to the nature of the mapping area (rural or urban); and it was well designed and defined in terms of technical structure and human resources. Volunteers tended to remain involved with the project both because they received incentives to continue their efforts, and because they could see the importance of their efforts—that is, see how the new data they had collected could be combined with hazard layers to determine potential disaster impact. 
### International Collaboration of Space Agencies to Support Disaster Risk Management Using Satellite Earth Observation <sup>37</sup>
*Philippe Bally (European Space Agency), Ivan Petiteville (European Space Agency, CEOS Disasters Working Group), Andrew Eddy (Athena Global), Francesco Gaetani (Group on Earth Observations Secretariat), Chu Ishida (Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency), Steven Hosford (Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales), Stuart Frye (NASA), Kerry Sawyer (CEOS), Guy Seguin (International Space Consultant)*

Working together in groups such as the Committee on Earth Observation Satellites (CEOS), national space agencies are seeking to coordinate their efforts and resources to make large volumes of earth observation (EO) data available for use in risk management and disaster reduction. EO data are currently used operationally in the context of disaster response by the International Charter (see Box 19).  

The EO data come in various forms—medium- and high-resolution optical data; medium- and high-resolution microwave radar data (C, L, and X band); interferometric SAR (synthetic aperture radar) data products; infrared and thermal data; and meteorological data sets—and can serve as the basis of regular, detailed updates on the status of hazards globally, regionally, or nationally. Currently, much EO data complements ground data, but where in situ information is limited, EO data may be the only source of information available. 

[Box 19]

EO data can be instrumental in risk assessment and disaster reduction. These data can be used for a range of applications, such as mapping hazards, evaluating asset exposure, and modelling vulnerability: 
- *Basic mapping.* Nearly all the mapping services provided by satellite EO to DRM and humanitarian aid projects are underpinned by basic mapping. This base-layer information serves as a standardized geographical reference data set that can be used to determine key geographical attributes of a given area. 
- *Asset mapping.* Asset mapping provides up-to-date, synoptic, and objective infrastructure information concerning the asset at risk. It can also add to and improve knowledge about the potential impact of natural hazards in areas at risk. 
- *Urban mapping.* This service assesses the structure of the built-up areas. In agglomerations where urban expansion is progressing very rapidly and the territorial conditions are extremely constrained, EO data help to create easily updatable baseline maps of urban assets while taking into account location of informal settlements and their high vulnerability to natural hazards such as floods and landslides.
- *Remote assessment of damage.* This service uses processed satellite data from before and after a disaster to provide crisis mapping, situation mapping, and damage assessment for on-the-ground disaster response by governments, first responders, and planners of resilient recovery.
- *Flood risk analysis.* This service provides information to support risk management and water resources management. Depending on input data and methodologies used, different types of information can be extracted, such as the classified distribution of the land cover and socioeconomic units in areas at risk, or hazard damage information based on measurements of water depth and/or flow velocity. 
- *Precise terrain deformation mapping.* This service contributes to geohazard risk assessment to support mitigation, prevention, and preparedness. For a wide range of risk assessments, including those concerned with flood, seismic hazard, and climate change, terrain-motion information has direct relevance.  
- *Landslide inventories and landslide monitoring.* These services provide hazard mapping information in landslide-prone areas and carry out repeat observations over large areas. (Locally, emergency monitoring of hot spots typically is performed using ground-based radar as the primary source).

CEOS has developed a long-term vision for how it can expand its contributions to all phases of DRM. It anticipates contributions that are global in scope, even as they build on strong partnerships at local, national, or regional levels; that are user driven; that address several hazard types; and that take into account all relevant EO-based capabilities available or under development. As part of this vision, and to demonstrate the benefits of EO data used in complement to more conventional data sources, CEOS is implementing pilots defined with representatives of the user community (scientists, civil protection agencies, local resources management authorities, etc.) for floods, seismic hazards, and volcanoes in 2014–2016.

Looking at the tremendous resources of new EO missions—some innovations are described in Box 20—and the volume of service delivery by current projects in DRM, users could consider how such volumes of data might be better exploited. Existing use for risk assessment and disaster preparedness remains embryonic, despite evident potential. Further investment may be required to support new user communities and emerging partnerships. Looking at efforts to reduce disaster risk, existing services have proved useful and have demonstrated the cost benefit of providing risk assessment based on satellite EO data. For some geo-information needs, additional research and development is required. For other needs the available products are mature, precise, and documented. However, currently it appears that the main obstacle to progress remains lack of awareness of what exists and what can be accomplished.

[Box 20]
